[Merged by Bors] - Add support for Iceberg connector (#286)
stackabletech/trino-operator: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/usage.adoc

2.67 [15 rows, 8.08KB] [5 rows/s, 3.02KB/s]
----

== Catalogs
=== Create catalog
Trino connects to datasources via https://trino.io/docs/current/connector.html[connectors].
Each connector enables access to a specific underlying datasource like a Hive warehouse, PostgresSQL or Druid instance.

Currently the following connectors are supported:

* https://trino.io/docs/current/connector/hive.html[Hive]
* https://trino.io/docs/current/connector/iceberg.html[Iceberg]

An instance of a connector is called a catalog.
Think of a setup containing a large Hive warehouses based on a HDFS.

> You than have two catalogs called e.g. `warehouse1` and `warehouse1` that both use the `hive` connector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You then can have two catalogs called e.g. `warehouse-1` and `warehouse-2` that both use the `hive` connector.
```

metadata:
  name: iceberg
  labels:
    trino: simple-trino
spec:
  connector:
    iceberg:
      metastore:
        configMap: simple-hive-derby
      s3:
        inline:
          host: test-minio
          port: 9000
          accessStyle: Path
          credentials:
            secretClass: minio-credentials
----

The `metadata.name` will be the name of the catalog that shows up in your Trino instance.
The `metadata.labels` will be used to determine, which Trino instance imports which `TrinoCatalogs`.
The `spec.connector.<connector>` determines which connector is used.
Each connector supports a different set of attributes.

=== Add catalog to Trino cluster
You have to specify within your `TrinoCluster` which catalogs it should use as follows:

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: trino.stackable.tech/v1alpha1
kind: TrinoCluster
metadata:
  name: simple-trino
spec:
  version: 387-stackable0.1.0
  catalogLabelSelector:
    matchLabels:
      trino: simple-trino
# ...
----

The `spec.catalogLabelSelector` is used to fetch the list of `TrinoCatalogs` used for this Trino cluster.
In this case the `hive` and `iceberg` catalogs will be used as they both match the `catalogLabelSelector`.

> This mechanism allows to create a `TrinoCluster` once and than add new catalogs dynamically by simple creating `TrinoCatalog` objects.

Reviewer: Can we dynamically add these? I think this is a config change and will trigger a restart? I would rather mention that the catalogs can be reused by different trino clusters?
```suggestion
This mechanism allows to create a `TrinoCluster` once and then add new catalogs dynamically by creating `TrinoCatalog` objects.
```

Author: I would say both. Added the sentence
It also allows to reuse a `TrinoCatalog` within multiple `TrinoClusters`

I think adding it later on still is a valid thing (think like a team a operates the trino as a service and team b is able to add catalogs without team a). At the moment it requires a restart, but support for loading catalogs at runtime is worked on
